There is this NBA thing! National Basketball
Association… The world’s, probably the
world’s greatest display of basketball skill
and artistry… In that NBA, I came across
an interesting bit of statistics. You can
check out the URL up above too. Most MISSED
SHOTS in NBA history. You attempt a shot.
But, you miss it, the ball doesn’t go through
the ring and the net. That’s a missed shot.
Who holds the record for the maximum of those?
A record like that!! I have erased that person’s
body so I can give you time to guess who that
would be.
But, totally shocking! It is actually Kobe
Bryant! One of the greatest of the greats!
When Michael Jordan is close to retirement,
Kobe plays a game with him, and he is hailed
as the Next Michael Jordan… Who, by the
way the Greatest of the Greats! And, Kobe
Bryant has broken so many more records than
Michael. This record though, is for the maximum
number of shots missed. There is a message
there for us… Do you recognise what it is?
Namaste! Yesterday, we saw the Defeat of Victory.
Today, we are going to see the converse. The
Victory of Defeat. The same book. The Winning
Way. A Chapter on Defeat.
First, let us look at this quote from J K
Rowling. About Defeat. “You might never
fail on the scale I did, but some failure
in life is inevitable. It is impossible to
live without failing at something, unless
you live so cautiously that you might as well
not have lived at all — in which case, you
fail by default.” Such a beautiful call
to action, I would think.
The West Indies Team of the 80s. We talked
about the amazing world-famous victory for
India in the 1983 World Cup, over the West
Indies. This is the team that lost to us.
But, what happened after that? Do you know?!
It was almost as if we had awakened a sleeping
giant! We gave West Indies the spirit to win!
Just look at these numbers. Immediately after
the World Cup win by India against the West
Indies, we toured the West Indies. We lost
5–0. One Days. And, after that 5–0 blackwash,
do you have any idea how long India had to
wait for a win against the West Indies? All
over the world? They had to wait five years!
To get a single win! And, that win? A solitary
win in a 6–1 drubbing by the West Indies
who toured India! Once again! Who were they?
Clive Lloyd! Vivian Richards! Malcolm Marshall!
Gordon Greenidge! Giants! Stalwarts! So, sometimes,
a defeat is actually useful. Early on. Before
the stakes are too high. Because, it wakes
you up, and tells you that you can’t underestimate
the opposition, you can’t take anything
for granted, everyday you start from zero…
If you are looking for golden lessons like
these, an occasional loss is actually GOOD!
This person here is Pat Riley. He is considered
one of the greatest coaches in NBA history.
He has coached the Miami Heat. And the Los
Angeles Lakers. He, I think, has the maximum
number of Championship Rings. He has won as
a Player. As an Assistant Coach. As a Head
Coach. As an Owner. As an Executive. He has
written this book called The Winning Within.
He talks about something very special. He
says, “The Defeat of Us…comes, sometimes,
from this Disease of Me!”. Find out if you
are afflicted by this Disease of Me. Have
you lost? Are you planning to analyse? Well,
look for the Disease of Me first!
So, what is this Disease of Me? He gives these
Seven Deadly Sins. He asks you to look for
these seven problems! Inexperience with success.
Can you bear the crown of victory” lightly
on your head? The burden of success that we
saw yesterday. If you see somebody struggle
because of inexperience there, Problem! Is
there somebody moping in a corner, often,
feeling that nobody appreciates him enough
for his contributions? That is a Problem!
Is somebody feeling that they are always getting
“cheated out”? That they MAY GET cheated
that? That they WILL NOT get the opportunity
that they deserve? Are there people like that
in your team? Problem! Is somebody upset and
having a heartburn because somebody else in
the same team is doing something exceptional??
When you are in a team, you should be HAPPY
that you are among top performers! If you
are unhappy, if you are feeling resentment,
that somebody else in your team is doing well,
Problem! Is a team member’s personal effort
geared towards bettering the opposition? Or,
is it aimed at outshining somebody else within
the team?! Problem! Are there rivalries internally?
It
is not the India-Pakistan rivalry! It is among
Pakistani players. It is among Indian players.
Who will be higher in the batting order? Who
will bowl the last over? If he is batting,
I won’t go as the second runner… This
sort of rivalry! Big problem. The team will
be decimated! And, finally, even if the team
actually wins, even if the team member has
actually won, are they filled with frustration,
just because they couldn’t do their best,
they didn’t contribute to that win, … are
they frustrated? Among these seven sins, even
if you have committed just one of these, even
if just one of these has infected your team,
please get in and fix it fast! The seven deadly
sins..! The Disease of Me that leads to the
Defeat of Us!
You must surely know this guy. Sachin Tendulkar.
He seems slightly upset. I am sure you know
this person too. Michael Jordan. He seems
deep in thought.. Upset. The reason I picked
these “mood out” pictures is… Harsha
Bhogle says in that book — both of these
players had a specific problem! Their problem
was — They wanted to win it for the team.
They assumed they HAD to win it for their
team. A motivation. A drive. Good. But, what
is the bad side? The other side of the coin?
Everybody else in the team assumed these two
would win it for their team! That is the problem!
If you have a superduper star in your team,
this is a problem you need to fix. Because,
they will all assume that the superstar will
win it for us. Why..! Haven’t we seen this
in our Superstar movies too? Too often, we
think, just because we have that Superstar
in our movie, the movie will be carried forward!
Businesses.. companies.. you can notice the
same story playing out.
Success.. Failure.. They aren’t a black
and white, clear distinction. There is a beautiful
bell curve of activity. Yes… there is SUCCESS
in one end of the scale. The winners. Very
few. But, you find them there. FAILURE is
on the other end of the spectrum. Yes. That
is failure. But, there is a lot in between!
That grey area.. We aren’t respecting it
enough, says Harsha Bhogle.
What are those grey areas? There are two areas.
One, before the peak of the curve, is the
place where we realise we could have done
better. We could have put in some more effort.
I am capable of better. That is the first
grey area. And then, there is this second
area where you have already put in one hundred
percent of effort, but because of reasons
beyond your control… numerous reasons you
have no control over… lead to you not winning,
you not succeeding, that day.
In the 80s and the 90s, there was this German
lady. They called her Fraulein Forehand. Steffi
Graf. You must have heard of the name. Simply
amazing! She has won SO MANY Grand Slams.
She hold the record for the maximum number
of weeks at Number One position in the ATP
rankings. But, she had a problem. Her problem
was,… her backhand? Was always a sliced
backhand. The two-handed forced backhand,
she was never able to really execute it well.
Sliced backhand. But, you know what she did?
She focused on her strengths. What was her
strength? That was her MONSTROUS forehand.
Very powerful. That’s why she was called
Fraulein Forehand. In that book, Harsha Bhogle
says, … this is a lesson we have seen earlier
too. Focus on your strengths. Ignore your
weaknesses. It is okay! The way he puts it
is… “Do not let what you CAN’T DO interfere
with what you CAN DO!” How beautiful!
As a closing thought, I want to share an interesting
quote I found in that book. This is Jack Welch.
The CEO of GE, once upon a time. Famous as
a super-powerful, turn-around CEO! He has
commented on something truly timeless. True
then. True today. True forever too, I would
think. He says, “If the rate of change on
the outside
exceeds the rate of change on the inside,
I am sorry, the end is near”! How beautiful!
We have reached the end of THIS video. See
you again, on the Sixth of July! Thank you!